# Adventures in Web Assembly

With the end of the Browser Preview (and wasm version 0x1) in Q1 2017 fast-approaching, I figured it was high time to properly figure out how this thing works.

Web Assembly is really just another kind of bytecode, like what's produced by JVM (with the important unifying factor being that it should run on any platform). You start with C/C++ (work in the Rust, and to a lesser extent Golang, community notwithstanding), compile it to either asm.js or LLVM WebAssembly bytecode (`.s`), then compile *that* to WebAssembly using one of the [binaryen](https://github.com/WebAssembly/binaryen) compilers (asm2wasm, s2wasm).

The widespread implementation by browser vendors won't exactly spell the end of server-side applications (such a suggestion is...well, stupid). What it *will* enable, however, is the slow phasing out of pretty much all fat clients; photo editor too slow for local operations, too bandwidth-intensive for remote processing? write the core in C++, compile to wasm and **boom**, native-level performance, plus a bonus distribution platform.

Scientific computing could, tangentially at least, benefit from wasm. For the typical BLAST/Clustal/Primer3 workflow of a molecular biologist, there's a fair amount of toggling back and forth between big needle-in-haystack jobs submitted to a (high-contention) local cluster and one-off "hmmm, what are the important metrics of this subset?" local runs (if we're being honest, these are actually done via the NCBI web interfaces). If, say, the job submission UI had both 'remote BLAST (faster for large batches)' and 'local BLAST (faster for small batches)', with the latter invoking a wasm module, the friction between switching contexts could be eliminated, while ensuring a level playing field between one-off and bulk analysis. Sure, there's a ton of desktop applications that do this sort of thing, you may say - this is true, however the below differences apply:

* Administrator permissions: 0
* Setup time: time to download the wasm module. In a research institute, 10s for 200MB.
* Time until useful (loading time + time for all functionality): 15s first load. ~1s all subsequent (assuming a service worker).
* Deployment time: 0s (point users at the site). ~10 minutes if you want to cut the user setup time by 90% and deploy internally.
